# Capstone-Project-Malaria-Detection

Malaria Detection using Deep Learning:

Executive Summary:
	Malaria is a deadly disease that can cause various health problems and ravages the body. On a large scale this disease can be fatal but the spread of the disease can prove a new infection to spread and mutate across different people. With the understanding of a test image and the presence of malaria in cells can help us detect and eradicate or attack the cells that are affected in the body. The process of understanding an image and being able to compare it to millions of other cells with the parasitized gene can be done using algorithms that can help us identify and  detect the virus in the cell with accuracy. In our test case we were given a compiled file with multiple images of cells that were observed during microscopy but we were given only the way that each of the cells looked were we had an uninfected cell and a parasitized cell. Through the process we can understand and be able to identify and segregate the cells to help people use the code and process to get a deeper understanding to how we can use this help in future cases and doctors to be able to get a better split and better segregation between the parasitized and the uninfected cells when they are trying to observe and collect data on the issue. The key takeaways from our test was to help us get a better method and better model that can successfully segregate the parasitized and uninfected cell values to help us get better results when we separate the two images. We can use this to create a test run or deep learning algorithm that allows us to label and identify the different cell types and be able to clarify and detect in the images that are given to us to help us categorize the two different parasitized and uninfected cells. The next steps for us to understand are to be able to grow and build upon the model to help us get a more clear and be able to get a more accurate malaria parasite detection. We can test this model in a larger scale with more variables present and be able to see if the accuracy of the detection rates are going to stay consistent, if then we need to upgrade the model in any way to help us get the best reading and understanding of the detection values we can help improve the model to make it more accessible to the detection of the malaria detection in other cases. We are going to use the data given  to us from the document, with the data collected from the first run we see the comparison with the test and the train run to see the uninfected vs the parasitized cells. In the train out of the 24,958 cells observed we saw that 12,582 cells were parasitized and in the test run we saw that 1300 out of the 2600 were parasitized. We see that in this run out of the test we saw that approximately 50% of the cells that were observed had a parasitic compound. We also were able to identify and understand the different images of the cells and be able to understand a plot of what showed parasitic cells and what were uninfected cells. With this understanding the way we can approach this problem is by understanding how we can detect the parasitic malaria cells in a larger case to be able to understand how to prevent the malaria spread and we can also be able to code a problem solver to help us understand how the detection process works. We can have a deep learning algorithm to help us identify and label the malaria infected cells at an earlier stage to prevent a repeat in the same cell and also help us understand how to delete the duplicate images. We were able to get the pixel count and understand the color patterns to help us identify the cells that had parasitic malaria detected. Afterwards we are able to use coloration in the images and be able to identify future variations of the malaria parasitization of the cell. 
Problem and Solution Summary:
The problem that we are trying to observe  truly from this process and what we are trying to understand is how can we optimize and get a more accurate detection software to help us classify and identify malaria parasitization across different source cells that are given from the source. Through this process we are really also trying to make it easier for researchers and doctors to be able to detect and use a more accurate system to help them identify and sort out the two variables from the test images that were given. What we are trying to really get as a final outcome through this process is to be able to optimize and accurately segregate or detect the cells that are being parasitized. For the future model we can be able to get a model that can continuously accurately get the detections correct through the process. Things that need to be adapted in the model is to be able to get a better understanding of the detection process and be able to get rid of any buffer variables or any variables that can be repeated. Doing this can improve our accuracy and process the detection of the malaria parasite. This process can improve the model in the sense of being able to improve our accuracy and be able to provide us data on how accurate our categorization between the two variables are. In our model runs we tried different models to understand how the process works through different methods, but also we need to be able to understand which model will help us get the best outcome for our results. With the different models we can create a heat map to see how many of the variables were matched correctly and how many of the variables we saw were mismatched. With this understanding we need to be able to provide the data that is best fit for the model and also be able to get a better understanding on how  we can use that code to provide the best model for other data sets that are presented to it. In this model we see that the accuracy with the different epochs is on average between 97.5 and 99.0% percent accuracy showing that the model is best fit between the different test cases that we analyzed all the other models also had high accuracy but in our case with the other models we did not see a great level of match in the heat maps showing that we had a larger value of mismatched cell between the parasitized and the uninfected. Through the models that we look to understand this model is the best model to describe the data that is being produced from the detection run. As we see the heat map. 
We can use this to understand how many cells were correctly identified( the cream color) and the misidentified cells( darker color). Through this we can then build a better model to help us understand and implement a strategy to help us improve upon our model to be able to grow and be more precise in the malaria detection process. The valid solution for us to be able to grow and understand the malaria detection process better would be to run multiple models similar to the last milestone to be able to become more accurate on our data collection methods. Through the model growth we can then be able to pick the best model that is adapted to the test data set. 
Recommendations for implementation:
When trying to run the code and the notebooks make sure the the data is a zip file and the data is unloaded from your google drive it is important to run each defining step and fro the history of the model runs and the epochs you should run the epochs twice to get the more accurate results because in the initial run The accuracy seemed low and be able to make sure that the code depicts the values and variables that are being desired. The actionable items that must be viewed across the board for this issue should be the model runs and being able to identify the accuracy values of the detection variables. We also need to understand the process and the factors that can help the detection process be able to run more smoothly and precisely. The benefits of  being able to run this model and being able to get malaria detection accurately is being able to detect and aid in medical treatment of patients that depict the parsitized cell presence in the cell. It can also help in the field of bioinformatics when it comes to the detection process if we can look at the DNA structure of the cell of the parasitic cells we can understand how and what chuck of the DNA is being mutated and using the data and the genetic code we can be able to predict the typical mutation types for these virus. With the Mutation types than we can build a model using python to be able reverse and detect the mutations to original dna code that is replicated in the uninfected cells. The key risks and challenges that we have faced with this so far is that the accuracy of the detection is not a 100% which we are not going to be able to get based on multiple different factors that affect the data sets. We also see issues from what models might be able to get the best results for the values we are looking for. We also need to understand how the detection process works and we also need to see how the code might be able to handle larger datasets. The first issue that needs to be solved and worked upon across the board is we need a more clear image of the parasitic cells to help us determine and segregate the cells more accurately and be able to have a model with an equal validation accuracy and test accuracy. Overall through this process of malaria detection we can really get a deeper understanding on how we can run different models and detection methods to be able to extract and identify the different parasitized cells. Through this code we can be able to predict the models and detect the malaria presence in cells from the test data set that was given to us but through deeper understanding we can build a process and algorithm that can help obtain better detection results.
